---
layout: post
title:  "Practical 1"
date:   2014-09-18 15:28:18
categories: practical
---

**0.** If you have no `github` account yet, create one at
<https://github.com> and then follow the instructions on
<https://help.github.com/articles/generating-ssh-keys> to generate a
new `ssh` key and add it to your `github` account.

On the command line in a terminal window, set the values of some
global variables that `git` would like to use:
{% highlight bash %}
git config --global user.name "John Doe"
git config --global user.email johndoe@example.com
{% endhighlight %}

You might want to replace the name in the above commands with your own name, and the email address with your own.

**1.** Start building a new application `depot`
and change into the newly created directory.
The commands for this (again on the command line) are:

{% highlight bash %}
rails new depot
cd depot
{% endhighlight %}

The first command might take a while to complete, so please be patient.
When it completes, a lot of files have been created automatically, and before
we move on and modify things, let's put these files under version control.

**1b.** Make sure that the current directory is the `depot` directory
that contains the freshly created `rails` application. Create a local
`git` repository as follows:
{% highlight bash %}
git init
git add .
git commit -m "initial commit"
{% endhighlight %}

**1a.** On your `github` account, create a new repository `depot`
(without `README` or other files').  Then follow the instructions to
`push` your new `depot` to the `github` cloud.

**2.** Next, we use _scaffolding_ to create a product model with   components
`title` (of type `string`),
`description` (of type `text`),
`image_url` (of type `string`)
and `price` (of type `decimal`). The full command for this is:
{% highlight bash %}
rails generate scaffold product title:string description:text image_url:string price:decimal
{% endhighlight %}
... all on one line.

**3.** Again, this command creates many files. One of them is a file
called `..._create_product.rb` in the directory `db/migrate`.
This file contains instructions to create a table with the specified columns
for `product` objects.  Open
the file in an editor and modify the line about the `price` to look like
{% highlight ruby %}
t.decimal :price, precision: 8, scale: 2
{% endhighlight %}
This informs the database that a price has 2 decimal digits (out of a total of 8).


**4.** In order to actually create the database (and a first table in it) we need
one more command (on the command line):
{% highlight bash %}
rake db:migrate
{% endhighlight %}
initialize the `products` table in the database.

**5.**  Start the server as a _background_ process:
{% highlight bash %}
rails server &
{% endhighlight %}
then point your browser to
`http://localhost:3000/products` and follow the instructions to
enter a new product.

**5a.** If it all works fine, it is time to update the `git`
  repository. The command
{% highlight bash %}
git status
{% endhighlight %}
will print a brief report about what has happened since the initial
commit.  You can now delete unwanted backup copies of files.  To commit
all changes, the new files and the modified ones, you can use the
commands
{% highlight bash %}
git add .
git commit -m "scaffolded products"
{% endhighlight %}
similar to the ones used for the initial commit.  Then, to push the
update to the cloud:
{% highlight bash %}
git push
{% endhighlight %}
Check your `github` web pages to make sure the new version has arrived.

**6.** A number of files which `rails` creates automatically, serve the 
purpose of testing the basic functionality of the application.  Run the
test suite with the command 
{% highlight bash %}
rake test
{% endhighlight %}
and watch out for its effects.

**7.** The form for entering new products could look better in many 
ways. For example, the description field need not be that 
big. Study the file `app/views/products/_form.html.erb`
and modify the line about the `description` text area to
{% highlight erb %}
<%= f.text_area :description, rows: 6 %>
{% endhighlight %}

Then enter a new product, and notice the changed appearance of the form.

**8.** Run the test suite again (`rake test`) and
watch out for its effects.

**8a.**  Again, if you are happy with the modifications and it all works as it should,
update your git repositories, local and remote:
{% highlight bash %}
git add .
git commit -m "resized description field"
git push
{% endhighlight %}
Check your `github` page for updates.

**9.** Let's populate the database with some data that we can play 
with. Download the files

* [db/seeds.rb](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/db/seeds.rb)
* [app/assets/images/logo.png](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/images/logo.png)
* [app/assets/images/debug.jpg](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/images/debug.jpg)
* [app/assets/images/rtp.jpg](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/images/rtp.jpg)
* [app/assets/images/ruby.jpg](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/images/ruby.jpg)
* [app/assets/images/wd4d.jpg](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/images/wd4d.jpg)
* [app/assets/stylesheets/depot.css](http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot/app/assets/stylesheets/depot.css)

from <http://schmidt.nuigalway.ie/cs424/depot> and copy them into the
corresponding directories in your depot application.

**10.** Open the `db/seeds.rb` file in an editor and delete `/images/` from all the `image_url` fields in the file.  Then load these data
into your database with the command `rake db:seed`.  (This will probably
delete all previously entered data.)

**10a.** If all went well, update the `git` repositories, local and remote.
Can you see the new contents of the database on your `github` pages?  Why not?

**11.** Replace the contents of the file `app/views/products/index.html.erb` by

    <div id="product_list">
      <h1>Listing products</h1>

      <table>
      <% @products.each do |product| %>
        <tr class="<%= cycle('list_line_odd', 'list_line_even') %>">

          <td>
            <%= image_tag(product.image_url, :class => 'list_image') %>
          </td>

          <td class="list_description">
            <dl>
              <dt><%= product.title %></dt>
              <dd><%= truncate(strip_tags(product.description),
                     :length => 80) %></dd>
            </dl>
          </td>

          <td class="list_actions">
            <%= link_to 'Show', product %><br/>
            <%= link_to 'Edit', edit_product_path(product) %><br/>
            <%= link_to 'Destroy', product, 
                        :confirm => 'Are you sure?',
                        :method => :delete %>
          </td>
        </tr>
      <% end %>
      </table>
    </div>

    <br />

    <%= link_to 'New product', new_product_path %>

Then reload the products index page in your browser and notice the difference.

**11a.**  And again, one last time, if you are happy with the changes,
update the `git` repositories.

**12.**  Formulate at least 5 questions about this code and submit them as comments to this article.
