---
title:  "01. Hello Rails."
categories: lecture
published: false
---

How to develop a database driven web application, like an online shop, a news site, a blog or a social networking site?

## (Ruby on) Rails

Rails is a **development framework**
for database centric interactive web-based applications.
It supports the development of applications that access and
modify the contents of a database without explicitly using SQL.

Rails supports, sets, enforces certain standards.  It uses the
Model-View-Controller (MVC) software architecture.  It implements
standard design patterns like thr CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete)
interface to a database. I supports protocols like ReST
(Representational State Transfer) and encourages principles like DRY
(don't repeat yourself).  By following the principle of **Convention
over Configuration**, Rails can provide working solutions to common
software development requirements as useful defaults.

In particular, the development of a Rails application starts with a
working application, which is the developed incrementally, remaining
in a working state most of the time.

Rails supports incremental development through a variety of tools like
validation, unit testing, version control, ...

# Ruby

Rails itself is an application written in the ruby language.  Ruby is
an object oriented, interpreted, open source, general purpose
programming language, focused on simplicity and productiviy.

Ruby has some interesting features that distinguish it from other
programming languages.  Ruby does not separate primitive data types
from objects, everything - numbers, strings, arrays - is an object in
ruby.  Ruby method calls can be accompanied by (nameless but
parametrized) blocks (of code).  Ruby provides explict access to its
symbol table.

We'll learn some ruby as we move along, enough to understand
what is done.

# Hello Rails: A First App

Let's built an app that can say 'hello' and 'goodbye' with just a
few keystrokes.   Start by creating a new folder that will contain
all the work.

{% highlight bash %}
mkdir cs424
cd cs424
{% endhighlight %}

Then build an intial Rails app by the name of `hello` as follows.  {%
highlight bash %} rails new hello {% endhighlight %} This command will
generate a whole list of files.  The Model-View-Controller
architecture manifests itself in the form certain subfolders.

{% highlight bash %}
cd hello
rails server &
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight bash %}
rails generate controller say hello goodbye
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight ruby %}
class SayController < ApplicationController
  def hello
  end

  def goodbye
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight ruby %}
  def hello
    @time = Time.now
  end
{% endhighlight %}

