---
title:  Practical 8
categories: practical
published: true
---

**0.**
Finish [Practical Sheet 7]({% post_url 2016-11-02-practical7 %}).

**1. User Accounts.** Allowing users to log in and out requires
another table containing the user names and associated passwords.  The
situation is complicated by the fact that passwords must not be stored
literally.  What's stored is a digest hash value of a user's password,
in such a way that original password cannot be computed from these two
(in case the database gets stolen or otherwise compromised). Rails
provides a data type `digest` for this purpose.  Generate the scaffold
for a `User` model as usual:

|-|
| `User` ||
|-:+:-|
| `name` | `string` |
| `password` | `digest` |
|-|

What is the full command?

**2.** Find the migration that has been generated as part of the
`User` scaffold and check its contents.  Does it look different from
what you would have expected?

Enter the filename of the migration
into the comment box below, as evidence that you have attended this
practical.

Then migrate the database.

**3. Model.** In the `User` class, add validation that ensures for
each user that the `name` is present and unique, i.e., each user must
have a name and no two users can have the same name.
What is the `ruby` code for this?

Why can't you test `presence: true` on the `password` field?

Note the command `has_secure_password` in the `User` model.  It has
been added as part of the scaffolding for the `password` component of
type `digest`.  It's purpose is to manage a `password confirmation`
field on the `user` form.

**4.** For the purpose of encrypting the passwords we use the
`bcrypt-ruby` gem.  Uncomment the corresponding line in the `Gemfile`.
Then run

    bundle install

and restart your server.

**5. Controller.** Some modifications are necessary in the
users controller (which file?).

First, in the `index` method, replace
`@users = User.all` by `@users = User.order(:name)`, to have
user names listed alphabetically.

**6.** Then, in the `create` and in the `update` methods, instead of
`@user`, redirect to `users_url` after successfully creating or
updating the user, and insert `#{@user.name}` into the `:notice`
string.  (Note: this string now needs to be delimited by double
quotes, rather than single quotes, to enable _string interpolation_, a
ruby feature that will replace `#{@user.name}` automatically by the
user's name.)

**7. Views.**
There is no notice yet, in the users index view.
To display the notice about newly created or updated  users, add the lines
{% highlight html+ruby %}
<% if notice %>
  <p id="notice"><%= notice %></p>
<% end %>
{% endhighlight %}
to the top of the `index` view.

**8.**
Modify the form partial (which file?) that is used to enter new users and to update existing users so that it looks as follows:
{% highlight html+ruby %}
<div class="depot_form">

<%= form_for @user do |f| %>
  <% if @user.errors.any? %>
    <div id="error_explanation">
      <h2><%= pluralize(@user.errors.count, "error") %>
        prohibited this user from being saved:</h2>
      <ul>
      <% @user.errors.full_messages.each do |msg| %>
        <li><%= msg %></li>
      <% end %>
      </ul>
    </div>
  <% end %>

  <fieldset>
  <legend>Enter User Details</legend>

  <div class="field">
    <%= f.label :name, 'Name:' %>
    <%= f.text_field :name, size: 40 %>
  </div>

  <div class="field">
    <%= f.label :password, 'Password:' %>
    <%= f.password_field :password, size: 40 %>
  </div>


  <div class="field">
    <%= f.label :password_confirmation, 'Confirm:' %>
    <%= f.password_field :password_confirmation, size: 40 %>
  </div>

  <div class="actions">
    <%= f.submit %>
  </div>

  </fieldset>
<% end %>

</div>
{% endhighlight %}
Note how `<legend>` and `<fieldset>` tags have been added to improve the appearance of the form, and that the entire form is enclosed in a `<div>` tag with the class `.depot_form` that is defined in the style sheet.

**9.**
Navigate to `http://localhost:3000/users/new` and create an account for yourself, and another one for a friend.  The index will just show a list of names.
To see that password related information has arrived in the database,
enter the following bit of SQL on the command line:

    sqlite3 -line db/development.sqlite3 "select * from users"

**10. Test.**  We need to update the tests to reflect the changes to validations and redirections.  The test `"should create user"` should read like
{% highlight ruby %}
test "should create user" do
  assert_difference('User.count') do
    post :create, user: { name: 'sam', password: 'secret',
      password_confirmation: 'secret' }
  end

  assert_redirected_to users_path
end
{% endhighlight %}
In a similar way, modify the `assert_redirected_to` line of the
`"should update user"` test.

**11.** In the `users.yml` fixtures, change the names of the two users
to `conor` and `emma` (in that order).

Note how some values in the fixtures are now computed dynamically
in the form of embedded ruby.  This is another effect of scaffolding a `password` component of type `digest`.

**11a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.

**12. Authentication.**
In order to support logins of store administrators, the site needs

* a login page, i.e., a _form_ that allows users to enter their names and passwords,

* a place to record that a user is logged in,

* a way to restrict access to the administrative part of the store.

Let's start by generating some actions in two controllers

    rails generate controller sessions new create destroy
    rails generate controller admin index


**13.**
The `create` method in the sessions controller, records the user id
in the `session` hash and redirects
to the admin home page, if the correct password is provided,
otherwise, reloads the login page.
Modify the method to look as follows:
{% highlight ruby %}
def create
  user = User.find_by(name: params[:name])
  if user and user.authenticate(params[:password])
    session[:user_id] = user.id
    redirect_to admin_url
  else
    redirect_to login_url, alert: "Invalid user/password combination"
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
(Here, `admin_url` and `login_url` are symbolic names for routes
that still have to be defined.)

**14.**
For the login page, we use a form that (unlike the forms we have used before)
is not directly linked to a model object -- it would not make sense here, would it?  This is the `sessions/new.html.erb` view:
{% highlight html+ruby %}
<div class="depot_form">
  <% if flash[:alert] %>
    <p id="notice"><%= flash[:alert] %></p>
  <% end %>
  <%= form_tag do %>
    <fieldset>
      <legend>Please Log In</legend>
      <div>
        <%= label_tag :name, 'Name:' %>
        <%= text_field_tag :name, params[:name] %>
      </div>
      <div>
        <%= label_tag :password, 'Password:' %>
        <%= password_field_tag :password, params[:password] %>
      </div>
      <div>
        <%= submit_tag "Login" %>
      </div>
    </fieldset>
  <% end %>
</div>
{% endhighlight %}
Note how the form uses the helper method `form_tag` and friends.
Also note how it directly accesses and uses the `params` hash
in order to communicate filed values between the form and the server.

**15.**
Logging out is easy: remove the user id from the `session` hash
and send the browser back to the catalog page.  Use the following two lines
as body of the session controller's `destroy` method:
{% highlight ruby %}
session[:user_id] = nil
redirect_to store_url, notice: "Logged out"
{% endhighlight %}

**16.**
Prepare the `admin/index` view to greet a freshly logged in administrator
with useful information:
{% highlight html+ruby %}
<h1>Welcome</h1>
It's <%= Time.now %>.
We have <%= pluralize(@total_orders, "order") %>.
{% endhighlight %}

**17.**
For this to work, the instance variable `@total_orders`
has to be provided by the `admin` controller.  Add the line
{% highlight ruby %}
@total_orders = Order.count
{% endhighlight %}
to its `index` method.

**18.**
What still missing is routes connecting to the symbolic names like `admin_url` and `login_url`.
Rails has automatically set up
routes for
`admin/index`,
`sessions/new`,
`sessions/create` and
`sessions/destroy` in the `routes.rb` config file.
Delete these four, and rename them to the more descriptive
`admin`,
`login` and
`logout`, by inserting
{% highlight ruby %}
get 'admin' => 'admin#index'

controller :sessions do
  get 'login' => :new
  post 'login' => :create
  delete 'logout' => :destroy
end
{% endhighlight %}
into the file instead.

Now you can use the login feature to prevent non admin visitors
of the web site from accessing admin pages.  Try and log in as an admin.

**19.** The functional tests in the session controller need to be updated in order to match the recent changes.  Modify the session controller test file to look like:
{% highlight ruby %}
require 'test_helper'

class SessionsControllerTest < ActionController::TestCase
  test "should get new" do
    get :new
    assert_response :success
  end

  test "should login" do
    conor = users(:one)
    post :create, name: conor.name, password: 'secret'
    assert_redirected_to admin_url
    assert_equal conor.id, session[:user_id]
  end

  test "should fail login" do
    conor = users(:one)
    post :create, name: conor.name, password: 'wrong'
    assert_redirected_to login_url
  end

  test "should logout" do
    delete :destroy
    assert_redirected_to store_url
  end
end

{% endhighlight %}

**20. Restricting Access.** Rails uses _filters_ at various points in
the life cycle of an action.  One of these filters is `before_action`,
called before the processing of the action has even started.  This would
be the right place to check if the current user is logged in as an
admin.  Define a function
{% highlight ruby %}
protected

def authorize
  unless User.find_by(id: session[:user_id])
    redirect_to login_url, notice: "Please log in"
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
in the (`protected` part of the) application controller,
and as first line in the definition of the `ApplicationController` class,
add the command
{% highlight ruby %}
before_action :authorize
{% endhighlight %}
in order to use the `authorize` function as `before_action`
for _every_ action in this application.

**21.** This is not exactly what you want, people should still be
allowed to shop around and order without administrative privileges.
So you need to undo the effect of `before_action` on those actions
that should be generally accessible.
Authentication should be disabled for these actions.
As first line in the classes
`StoreController` and `SessionsController`, add the command
{% highlight ruby %}
skip_before_action :authorize
{% endhighlight %}
Access to the catalog and to the login page(!) should be unrestricted.

**22.**
Other controllers need a more fine-tuned access control.
Buyers are allowed to create, update and delete carts
(but not to see a particular cart, or a list of carts).
This is expressed by
{% highlight ruby %}
skip_before_action :authorize, only: [:create, :update, :destroy]
{% endhighlight %}
as first line in the carts controller class definition.

**23.**
They need to be able to create line items:
{% highlight ruby %}
skip_before_action :authorize, only: :create
{% endhighlight %}
(in the line items controller) and create orders through the new order form:
{% highlight ruby %}
skip_before_action :authorize, only: [:new, :create]
{% endhighlight %}
(in the orders controller).

**24.** These changes make most tests fail, as now most actions
redirect to the login page.  This can be rectified in the `test/test_helper.rb`
file by adding the methods:
{% highlight ruby %}
# Add more helper methods to be used by all tests here...
def login_as(user)
  session[:user_id] = users(user).id
end

def logout
  session.delete :user_id
end

def setup
  login_as :one if defined? session
end
{% endhighlight %}
Now all the tests should pass again.

**24a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.

**25.**
It would be convenient, to have an admin menu to the side bar
(in the `application.html.erb` layout file), in such a way that it
only appears when a user is logged in:
{% highlight html+ruby %}
<% if session[:user_id] %>
  <br />
  <%= link_to 'Orders',   orders_path   %><br />
  <%= link_to 'Products', products_path %><br />
  <%= link_to 'Users',    users_path    %><br />
  <br />
  <%= button_to 'Logout', logout_path, :method => :delete   %>
<% end %>
{% endhighlight %}
Now surf through your web site and experience the difference between
the buyer's and the seller's view ...

**25a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.
