---
title:  Practical 7
categories: practical
published: false
---

**0.**
Finish Practical Sheet 6.

**1. Taking Orders.**
In this practical, we add to our online store the functionality
that allows us to record the buyer's details and thus turn a
shopping cart into an order.  As a first step in that direction,
generate the scaffold for an `Order` model with the following components:

|---------||
| `Order` ||
|----------:+:----------|
|     `name` | `string` |
|  `address` | `text`   |
|    `email` | `string` |
| `pay_type` | `integer` |
|-------------------------|

In order to relate the `integer` payment types to human readable
names, add the following `enum` declaration the generated file that
contains the order model:

{% highlight ruby %}
enum pay_type: {
  "Cheque" => 0,
  "Credit Card" => 1,
  "Purchase Order" => 2
}
{% endhighlight %}

**2.**
Generate a migration to add a column `order` of type `references`
to the `line_items` table.
Write the name of the generated migration file into the comment box below, as evidence that you have attended this practical.

**3.**
Connect the `orders` table with the `line_items` table by
adding suitable `has_many` and `belongs_to` declarations (to which files?)
As in the `cart` model,
add the parameter `dependent: :destroy` to the `has_many` call:
when an order is destroyed, all its line items must go as well.
Then run the migrations:

    rake db:migrate

**4.**
Add a `'Checkout'` button next to the `'Empty Cart'` button (which file?):

    <%= button_to "Checkout", new_order_path, method: :get %>

Then put both buttons inside a `<div>` element with `class` attribute
`"actions"`.

**5.** There's no point checking out an empty cart.  In order to
decide this, the `orders` controller needs access to the current cart.
For this, add
{% highlight ruby %}
include CurrentCart
before_action :set_cart, only: [:new, :create]
{% endhighlight %}
to the top of this controller (which file?).


**6.**
Then, in  the `new` method of this controller, one can prevent  empty orders from being placed by this code:
{% highlight ruby %}
if @cart.line_items.empty?
  redirect_to store_url, notice: "Your cart is empty"
  return
end
{% endhighlight %}
Note that the explicit `return` statement here is needed to keep the controller
from trying to redirect and render a new page at the same time.

**7.** This expected behavior should be formulated as a test.  In the
file `orders_controller_test.rb` add:
{% highlight ruby %}
test "requires item in cart" do
  get :new
  assert_redirected_to store_path
  assert_equal flash[:notice], 'Your cart is empty'
end
{% endhighlight %}
Also modify the `"should get new"` test so that it loads something into the cart before creating an order, and reads:
{% highlight ruby %}
item = LineItem.new
item.build_cart
item.product = products(:ruby)
item.save!
session[:cart_id] = item.cart.id
get :new
assert_response :success
{% endhighlight %}

**7a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.

    git add .
    git commit -m "added checkout button"
    git push


**8. Forms.**
Replace the contents of the `order`'s `new` view with:
{% highlight erb %}
<div class="depot_form">
  <fieldset>
    <legend>Please Enter Your Details</legend>
    <%= render 'form' %>
  </fieldset>
</div>
{% endhighlight %}

**9.**
In the form itself, restrict the `name` and `email` input fields to
length 40 (`size: 40`), and the address to 3 rows and 40
columns (`rows: 3, cols: 40`).  Turn the `pay_type` field into a selection:
{% highlight erb %}
    <%= f.select :pay_type, Order::PAYMENT_TYPES,
                  prompt: "Select a payment method" %>
{% endhighlight %}
and pass the argument `"Place Order"` to the submit button.
In the `order` model, provide a list of payment options as:
{% highlight ruby %}
PAYMENT_TYPES = [ "Cheque", "Credit card", "Purchase order" ]
{% endhighlight %}

**10.** Add these formatting rules to the stylesheet
`app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss`.
{% highlight scss %}
.depot_form {
  fieldset {
    background: #efe;

    legend {
      color: #dfd;
      background: #141;
      font-family: sans-serif;
      padding: 0.2em 1em;
    }
  }

  form {
    label {
      width: 5em;
      float: left;
      text-align: right;
      padding-top: 0.2em;
      margin-right: 0.1em;
      display: block;
    }

    select, textarea, input {
      margin-left: 0.5em;
    }

    .submit {
      margin-left: 4em;
    }

    br {
      display: none;
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}
Now try it out: put some items into your cart and proceed to the checkout!
How does it look?


**11.** As this form is intended for the outside world, the application
cannot rely on all input always being valid.
Add validation (to which model?) to ensure that the fields `name`, `address`, `email`, `pay_type` are all present and filled at submit time.
Also make sure, the `pay_type` is one of the choices in the dropdown menu:
{% highlight ruby %}
validates :pay_type, inclusion: PAYMENT_TYPES
{% endhighlight %}

**12.** Modifying the validation rules almost always requires us to
adjust the fixtures so that they pass validation.  In the fixtures file
`orders.yml` modify fixture `one` to be:
{% highlight yaml %}
one:
  name: Dave Thomas
  address: MyText
  email: dave@example.org
  pay_type: Cheque
{% endhighlight %}
Then, in `line_items.yml`, modify fixture `one` to be:
{% highlight yaml %}
one:
  product: ruby
  order: one
{% endhighlight %}

**13. Create Order.**
Next comes the `create` action in the `orders` controller.  It needs to

1. Get the values from the order form to populate a new `Order` model object.

1. Add the line items from the cart to that order.

1. Validate and save the order object.

1. In case of failure, display
informative error messages that help the user to fix the problems.

1. In case of success, delete the cart, redisplay the catalog page and
a message confirming receipt of the order.

This is done as follows.
In the `Order` model, define a method that moves items from a cart to this order:
{% highlight ruby %}
def add_line_items_from_cart(cart)
  cart.line_items.each do |item|
    item.cart_id = nil
    line_items << item
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
(Note that the append method `<<` automatically sets
`item.order_id`.   Also note how `item.cart_id` is set to `nil`
to prevent the item from disappearing when the cart will be destroyed.)

In the `create` method of the orders controller,
add the line
{% highlight ruby %}
@order.add_line_items_from_cart(@cart)
{% endhighlight %}
after the assignment `@order = ...`,
and replace the `format.html` line under `if @order.save` by
{% highlight ruby %}
Cart.destroy(session[:cart_id])
session[:cart_id] = nil

format.html {
  redirect_to store_url, notice: 'Thank you for your order.'
}
{% endhighlight %}
The new redirect requires us to modify the corresponding assertion
in the `"should create order"` test: replace its last line by
{% highlight ruby %}
assert_redirected_to store_path
{% endhighlight %}

**14.** One more thing.  Our clever use of efficient AJAX techniques
will now only update the shopping cart on the catalog page, when the user
starts adding new items to a new shopping cart.  As a consequence, the `"Thank you ..."` message
remains on the page when it is no longer needed.  To make it go away, we can use javascript to
hide the `<div>` (with id `notice`) that contains it.  Add this to the
(top of the) sequence of javascript commands that are applied
whenever a new line item is created (i.e., in the file `line_items/create.js.erb`):
{% highlight js %}
$('#notice').hide();
{% endhighlight %}


**14a.** Now try it out and run the tests.  If all works fine, commit
the changes to your local `git` repository, and push them to the
`github` cloud.

**15. Atom feed.**
_Feeds_ are news broadcasting services.
You can subscribe to a feed and automatically receive regular updates.
Here the good news to be spread is that someone ordered some product.
In order to enable this service for our online store, we need to
set up a _new action_.  Recall that an action consists of three things:
a _controller method_, a _view template_, and a _route_.
First add the following _method_ to the products controller:
{% highlight ruby %}
def who_bought
  @product = Product.find(params[:id])
  @latest_order = @product.orders.order(:updated_at).last
  if stale?(@latest_order)
    respond_to do |format|
      format.atom
    end
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
To make a product aware of all the orders it is contained in,
add a line
{% highlight ruby %}
has_many :orders, through: :line_items
{% endhighlight %}
to the product model (which file?)

**16.**
The command `format.atom` expects to find a _view_ template
`who_bought.atom.builder`  in the `views/products` finder
(where `builder` is a template preprocessor, much like `erb`, but better suited for
producing XML, and per default associated to `.atom` files).
Create such a file with the following content.
{% highlight ruby %}
atom_feed do |feed|
  feed.title "Who bought #{@product.title}"

  feed.updated @latest_order.try(:updated_at)

  @product.orders.each do |order|
    feed.entry(order) do |entry|
      entry.title "Order #{order.id}"
      entry.summary type: 'xhtml' do |xhtml|
        xhtml.p "Shipped to #{order.address}"

        xhtml.table do
          xhtml.tr do
            xhtml.th 'Product'
            xhtml.th 'Quantity'
            xhtml.th 'Total Price'
          end
          order.line_items.each do |item|
            xhtml.tr do
              xhtml.td item.product.title
              xhtml.td item.quantity
              xhtml.td number_to_currency item.total_price
            end
          end
          xhtml.tr do
            xhtml.th 'total', colspan: 2
            xhtml.th number_to_currency order.line_items.map(&:total_price).sum
          end
        end

        xhtml.p "Paid by #{order.pay_type}"
      end
      entry.author do |author|
        author.name order.name
        author.email order.email
      end
    end
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
and briefly try and make sense of this code.

**17.**  Finally, add a matching _route_ by changing
`resources :products` in the file `config/routes.rb` to:
{% highlight ruby %}
resources :products do
  get :who_bought, on: :member
end
{% endhighlight %}

**18.**  Subscribe to `http://localhost:3000/products/3/who_bought.atom` in your favorite reader, order the product from the store page, and get the good news.

**18a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.
