---
title:  Practical 4
categories: practical
published: true
---

**0.** Finish Practical Sheet 3.  Run the tests (`rake test`) to make
sure everything works fine.
Today you will create some _new tables_ for various types of
objects, and _connect_ them to other tables in the database.


**1.** More precisely, we need two additional tables in the data base,
one for _shopping carts_, and one for items in shopping carts,
so-called _line items_.

The
purpose of a shopping cart object is to contain the products a buyer chooses for purchase. This concept is best modelled as a
relationship
between products and carts.  Such a relationship sits in its own table,
which here will be called `line_items`.

The cart object itself needs no components, and its scaffolding can be
generated with a simple

    rails generate scaffold cart

command.  Then run

    rake db:migrate

to actually make the table in the database.

**2. Sessions.** How does this work, a cart per user, with no user actually
logged in?  Rails maintains state between requests through the use of
cookies, and one thing contained in the cookie is called the
_session_.  This is a `ruby` hash `session` that allows the application to
recognise a returning user, and can furthermore be used to store
session related information, such as this user's shopping cart.


**3. Concerns.** A _concern_ is a piece of code that
can be shared between different controllers.  It sits in
a file in the dedicated folder `app/controllers/concerns`.

Here it will be convenient to declare a method `set_cart()`
(which either finds this user's cart, or creates a new one)
as a concern.  This is done by putting the following code
into a file `app/controllers/concerns/current_cart.rb`.
{% highlight ruby %}
module CurrentCart
  private

  def set_cart
    @cart = Cart.find(session[:cart_id])
  rescue ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound
    @cart = Cart.create
    session[:cart_id] = @cart.id
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
This code contains a couple of new `ruby` features, like `module`,
which we might ignore for the moment.
Marking the `current_cart` method as `private` restricts access to it.  The
`rescue` clause is executed only in case
`session[:cart_id]` is currently undefined
(which will cause an
`ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound` error to be raised).

**3a.** It might be a good idea to commit this incremental development
step to the `git` repository.  What commands would you have to type at
the command line to achieve this?

**4. Relationships.**
The purpose of a `line_item`  is to connect a product to a cart.
In the language of relational databases,
the `line_item`
table represents a _many-to-many_ relationship between products and carts:
a cart can contain many products, a product can be contained in many carts.
In this particular form, the many-to-many relationship is the result of 1. a
_one-to-many_ relationship between `line_items`
and `products`: each line item refers to _one_ product
and a product can be referred to by _many_ line items;
and 2. a
_one-to-many_ relationship between `line_items`
and `carts`: ...
The scaffolding command

    rails generate scaffold line_item product:references cart:references

will create the necessary files to set this up, including a migration.  Run

    rake db:migrate

to create the `line_times` table in the database.

Defining the type of both the `product` and the `cart` component of a
`line_item` as `references` has various effects.  In the database,
it will make columns `product_id`  and `cart_id` of type `integer`.
In the `LineItem` class (which file?) it will add the declarations
{% highlight ruby %}
belongs_to :product
belongs_to :cart
{% endhighlight %}
with the following effect.  In addition to the attributes `.product_id`
and `.cart_id` (which are supported by database columns), any line item
now has two additional attributes `.product` and `.cart` which can be
used to access the cart of a line item `li` simply as `li.cart`
(rather than `Cart.find(li.cart_id)`).

**5.** Relationships work in two ways, backwards and forwards.  It makes as
much sense to talk about _all_ the line items in a cart, as it does
for _the_ cart of a line item (but note the use of plural vs. singular:
we are talking about a one-to-many relationship here). This opposite
point of view is registered with the `Cart` model (which file?)  by
adding the following line to its definition:
{% highlight ruby %}
has_many :line_items, dependent: :destroy
{% endhighlight %}
Now, we can access the line items of a cart `cart` as
`cart.line_items`, and determine their number
as `cart.line_items.count` if so desired.

(The `dependent: :destroy` part will have the effect that when
a cart is deleted from the database, all line items associated with
the cart will also be deleted.  Makes sense, doesn't it.)

**6.** Add a similar line (without `dependent: :destroy`) to
the `Product` model (which file?).  This will allow us to access all
the line items that reference a product `product` as
`product.line_items`.


**7.**
Here, rather than silently deleting all line items referring to a product when
that product is deleted, we want to ensure that a product is not
removed from the database, as long as there are carts containing it to
be processed, that is, as long as it is still referenced by a line
item.  Add the following line to the top of the `Product` class
definition:
{% highlight ruby %}
before_destroy :ensure_not_referenced_by_any_line_item
{% endhighlight %}
and the following text to its end:
{% highlight ruby %}
private

# ensure that there are no line items referencing this product
def ensure_not_referenced_by_any_line_item
  unless line_items.empty?
    errors.add(:base, 'Line Items present')
    throw :abort
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
What does this code accomplish?  We can add a test to `products_controller_test.rb` that ensures that a product in a cart cannot be deleted:
{% highlight ruby %}
test "can't delete product in cart" do
  assert_difference('Product.count', 0) do
    delete product_url(products(:two))
  end

  assert_redirected_to products_url
end
{% endhighlight %}
Also change the line
`product: one`
to
{% highlight ruby %}
product: two
{% endhighlight %}
in the `line_items` fixture file (where?), so that
product `two` is contained in both line items
when testing.  Do a

    rake test

to see (or not) the effect.

**7a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.

    git add .
    git commit -m "added cart and line item models."
    git push


**8. Buttons.**  Buttons (in Rails) by default send a `HTTP POST` request
(as opposed to the `HTTP GET` request that is sent by a link).
The `create` action in the line item controller
(which file?) expects a `HTTP POST` request, doesn't it?
That's why a button in the user interface is a perfect match for
the wish to create a line item (i.e., a buyer's desire to
purchase a product).
The purchase decision in the form of a clickable button
is implemented as
{% highlight erb %}
<%= button_to 'Add to Cart', line_items_path(product_id: product) %>
{% endhighlight %}
in the right place (inside the `<div>` with `class="price"`) on the catalog page (`store/index.html.erb`).

**9.**  The button looks better with some additional styling:
{% highlight scss %}
form, div {
  display: inline;
}

input[type="submit"] {
  background-color: #282;
  border-radius: 0.354em;
  border: solid thin #141;
  color: white;
  font-size: 1em;
  padding: 0.354em 1em;
}

input[type="submit"]:hover {
  background-color: #141;
}
{% endhighlight %}
to be inserted just after the CSS rule for `.price`
near the end of the stylesheet `store.scss`.

**10.**
Next, we need to inform the line items controller (which file?)
how to actually create a new line item, taking into account the product
whose button has been pressed, and the cart to put it into.
For the cart, we have earlier prepared the `CurrentCart` concern.
In order to use it now, add the following two lines
to the top of the definition of the line items controller.
{% highlight ruby %}
include CurrentCart
before_action :set_cart, only: [:create]
{% endhighlight %}
This includes the `CurrentCart` module and arranges that
the `set_cart()` method is invoked before every `create()` action.
The effect of this will be that a suitable cart is assigned to the instance
variable `@cart`.

**11.** Then, to actually build the line item, replace the first line of
the `create()` action by:
{% highlight ruby %}
product = Product.find(params[:product_id])
@line_item = @cart.line_items.build(product: product)
{% endhighlight %}
and in the `format.html` part, replace `redirect_to @line_item` by
{% highlight ruby %}
redirect_to @line_item.cart
{% endhighlight %}
What effect will that have?

**12.** Now, since the controller method has been modified, we
need to update the corresponding functional test.
Run the tests now and see one failing.
In that failing test (`"should create line item"`, which file?),
replace the `post` line by
{% highlight ruby %}
post :create, product_id: products(:ruby)
{% endhighlight %}
and the `assert_redirected_to` line by
{% highlight ruby %}
assert_redirected_to cart_path(assigns(:line_item).cart)
{% endhighlight %}
Then run the tests again.  And test the `Add to Cart` button
in your application ...

**13.**
The effect of clicking the button could be a bit more informative.
Firstly, the cart page could list the items currently in the cart.
For this, replace the contents of `carts/show.html.erb` with
{% highlight erb %}
<% if notice %>
  <aside id="notice"><%= notice %></aside>
<% end %>

<h2>Your Pragmatic Cart</h2>
<ul>
  <% @cart.line_items.each do |item| %>
    <li><%= item.product.title %></li>
  <% end %>
</ul>
{% endhighlight %}
And secondly, the notice that a `line item was successfully created`
could look less out of place.  Add the following to `app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss`, before the `.content { }` bracket:
{% highlight erb %}
.notice, #notice {
  background: #ffb;
  border-radius: 0.5em;
  border: solid 0.177em #882;
  color: #882;
  font-weight: bold;
  margin-bottom: 1em;
  padding: 1em 1.414em;
  text-align: center;
}
{% endhighlight %}
And then: go shopping in your own online store!

**13a.** If all works fine, commit the changes to your local `git`
repository, and push them to the `github` cloud.
Surely, there are many questions left open.  Formulate one
as a comment below, as evidence that you attended this practical.
